ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct: A code of ethics endorsed by the
Association for Computing Machinery.
accessibility privacy: A conception of privacy in terms of being let alone, or being free
from intrusion into one’s physical space; contrasted with decisional privacy and informational
privacy.
agent: Someone or something that is capable of acting; agents that act on the behalf of
others are sometimes called “fiduciary agents.” See also artificial agent.
ambient intelligence (AmI): A technology that senses changes in the environment and
automatically adapts to these changes vis-a-vis the needs and preferences of users, while
remaining in the background and thus being virtually invisible to users. See also pervasive
computing and ubiquitous communication.
anonymity: In the context of cybertechnology, the ability to navigate the Internet and
participate in online forums without having to reveal one’s true identity.
applied ethics: A branch of ethical inquiry that examines practical (as opposed to
theoretical) moral issues and problems. See also ethical theory.
artificial agent (AA): A nonhuman agent that can be either a physical/biological entity
(such as a robot or cyborg) or an electronic/digital entity (such as an AI bot or “softbot”).
See also agent.
artificial intelligence (AI): The field of study that examines relationships between
machine intelligence and human intelligence. One branch of AI attempts to shed light
on human intelligence by using cybertechnology to simulate it; another branch is
concerned with constructing intelligent tools to assist humans in complex tasks. See
also expert systems.
autonomous machine (AM): A computerized system or agent that is capable of acting
and making decisions independently of human oversight. AMs can interact with and
adapt to (changes in) their environment and can learn (as they function).
avatar: A computer-generated image on a screen, or in virtual space, used to represent
someone. Some avatars exhibit human-like characteristics.
411
BGLOSS3GXML 10/20/2012 0:19:7 Page 412
bioinformatics: A field concerned with the acquisition, storage, manipulation, analyses,
and simulation of biological information on a computer, with the objective of making that
information more understandable and useful.
biometrics: The biological identification of a person, which includes eyes, voice, hand
prints, finger prints, retina patterns, and hand-written signatures.
blog (or Web log): A Web site that contains an online journal with reflections and
comments; blogs may be further categorized as political blogs, personal blogs, corporate
blogs, travel blogs, health blogs, literary blogs, and so forth. See also blogosphere.
blogosphere: A name given to the collective community of all blogs.
computer security: A branch of computer science concerned with both safeguarding
computer systems (hardware and software resources) from attacks by malicious programs,
such as viruses and worms, and protecting the integrity of the data resident in and
transmitted between those systems from unauthorized access.
consequentialism: An ethical theory that appeals to consequences, outcomes, or ends as
the essential criterion, or standard, used to justify particular actions and policies in a
moral system. See also utilitarianism.
contract theory of ethics: A theory that ties a moral obligation to assist others to an
express contract to do so. Contract theory is sometimes viewed as a minimalist theory of
morality, because without an explicit contract, one would simply be required to do no
harm to others; there is no obligation to actively assist others.
cookies: Text files that Web sites send to and retrieve from a Web visitor’s computer
system. Cookies technology enables Web site owners to collect information about a
visitor’s preferences while the visitor interacts with their Web sites.
Creative Commons (CC): A nonprofit organization whose aim is to expand the range of
creative work available to others to legally build upon and share, via a set of licensing
options intended to help artists and authors give others the freedom and creativity to
build upon their creativity.
cultural relativism: A descriptive thesis stating that different cultures have different views
about what is morally right or wrong. Many philosophers have argued that even if cultural
relativism is true, it does not logically imply moral relativism, which is a normative
position. See also moral relativism.
cyberbullying: A type of harassment (or bullying) that takes place online, via e-mail, text
messaging, or online forums, such as social networking sites.
cybercrime: Criminal activity that is either made possible or significantly exacerbated by
the use of computers and cybertechnology.
cyberethics: The field of study that examines moral, legal, and social issues involving
cybertechnology.
cyberstalking: The use of cybertechnology to clandestinely track the movement and
whereabouts of one or more individuals.
412 c Glossary
BGLOSS3GXML 10/20/2012 0:19:8 Page 413
cybertechnology: A range of computing and information/communication technologies,
from stand-alone computer systems to privately owned computer networks to the
Internet.
cyberterrorism: The convergence of cyberspace and terrorism, covering a range of
politically motivated hacking operations that can result in loss of life, severe economic
loss, or both.
data mining: A computerized technique for unearthing implicit patterns in large databases
to reveal statistical data and corresponding associations that can be used to
construct consumer profiles.
denial-of-service attacks: Repeated requests sent to a Web site that are intended to
disrupt services at that site. Denial-of-service attacks can be sent via third-party sites,
from computer systems located in universities and organizations, to confuse the targeted
sites about the source of the attacks.
deontological ethics: A theory of ethics that bases its moral system on duty or obligation
rather than on consequences and outcomes that result from actions. Deontological ethical
theories can be contrasted with consequentialist theories. See also consequentialism.
descriptive ethics: A branch of ethical inquiry that reports or describes the ethical
principles and values held by various groups and individuals. Descriptive ethics is usually
contrasted with normative ethics. See also normative ethics.
digital divide: The gap between those who have (“information haves”) and those who do
not have (“information have-nots”) computers and access to cybertechnology.
digital rights management (DRM): A technology that allows content owners to regulate
the flow of information in digital media by blocking access to it via encryption mechanisms,
and by enabling access to it through the use of passwords.
ethical theory: A branch of ethical inquiry dedicated to the study of philosophical
frameworks for determining when actions and policies are morally right or morally
wrong. Ethical theory, or theoretical ethics, is often contrasted with applied ethics. See
also applied ethics.
ethics: The study of morality or a moral system. Normative ethics approaches the study of
a moral system from the perspective of philosophy, religion, or law, whereas descriptive
ethics typically examines morality from the perspective of social science. See also
morality, descriptive ethics, and normative ethics.
expert system (ES): A computer program that is expert at performing one particular task
traditionally performed by humans; developed from research in artificial intelligence.
Because it is a computer program, an ES is different than a robot, which is a physical or
mechanical system. See also artificial intelligence and robotics.
hacktivism: The convergence of political activism and computer hacking by which
activists use cybertechnology to disrupt the operations of organizations.
identity theft: The act of taking another person’s identity by using that person’s name,
social security number, credit card numbers, and so forth.
Glossary b 413
BGLOSS3GXML 10/20/2012 0:19:8 Page 414
IEEE Code of Ethics: An ethical code sanctioned by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineering.
inductive argument: An argument form in which the premises, when assumed true, are
strong enough to suggest the likelihood of the argument’s conclusion. Unlike a valid
argument, the premises of an inductive argument cannot guarantee the conclusion.
informal logical fallacies: Fallacious arguments that commonly occur in everyday
discourse. Because these fallacies are so common, they have familiar names such as
ad hominem, ad populum, begging the question, and slippery slope.
information warfare (IW): Operations that target or exploit information media in order
to win some objective over an adversary. IW, unlike conventional warfare, can be
more disruptive than destructive; like conventional warfare, however, IW is waged by
nation states.
informational privacy: A conception of privacy in terms of control over the flow of one’s
personal information, including the collection and exchange of that information; contrasted
with accessibility privacy and decisional privacy.
intellectual property: An intangible form of property that is protected by a system of laws
such as patents, copyrights, trademarks, and trade secrets, through which authors and
inventors are given ownership rights over their creative works.
location privacy: A relatively new category of privacy concerned with the use of
embedded chips, RFID technology, and global positioning systems to track the physical
location of individuals at any point in time.
logical argument: A form or structure of reasoning in which one or more statements
(called premises) are used as evidence to support another statement, the conclusion.
machine ethics: A field that examines ethical concerns that arise because of what (highly
sophisticated) computers are capable of doing on their own, as opposed to ethical issues
resulting from what humans do with computers. See also robo-ethics.
macroethics: Concerned with the analysis of moral rules and policies at the societal level,
as opposed to the level of individuals. See also microethics.
malware: A label that applies to a cluster of “malicious programs,” including viruses,
worms, Trojan horses, logic bombs, and so forth; malware can also include “spyware.”
microethics: Concerned with the analysis of moral rules and directives at the level of
individuals, as opposed to the societal level. See also macroethics.
moral absolutism: A view holding that there are absolute moral principles and that there
is only one uniquely correct answer to every moral question.
moral objectivism: A compromise view between moral absolutism and moral relativism;
moral objectivists believe that there are objective standards for evaluating moral claims,
so that there can be agreement on the correct answers to many moral issues, but that
there can also be more than one acceptable answer to some moral issues. See also moral
absolutism and moral relativism.
414 c Glossary
BGLOSS3GXML 10/20/2012 0:19:8 Page 415
moral relativism: The view that there are no universal moral norms or standards and that
only the members of a particular group or culture are capable of evaluating the moral
principles used within that group. See also cultural relativism.
morality: A system comprising rules, principles, and values; at its core are rules of conduct
for guiding action, and principles of evaluation for justifying those rules. See also ethics.
MMORPGs: Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games, which include popular
video games such World of Warcraft and Second Life.
nanotechnology: A field dedicated to the development of extremely small electronic
circuits and mechanical devices built at the molecular level of matter.
normative ethics: A branch of ethical inquiry that is concerned with evaluating moral
rules and principles by asking what ought to be the case, as opposed to descriptive ethics
that simply reports what is the case (i.e., what individuals and cultures happen to believe)
with respect to morally right and wrong behavior. See also descriptive ethics.
online communities: Computer-mediated social groups that interact in virtual space, as
contrasted with traditional communities in which interaction occurs in physical space.
open source software: Software for operating systems and applications in which the
source code is made freely available to use, modify, improve, and redistribute. Open
source software, such as the Linux operating system, is contrasted with proprietary
operating system software such as MS Windows.
P2P technology: Peer-to-peer technology, which enables two or more computers to
share files through either a centralized directory such as the (original) Napster site or a
decentralized system such as LimeWire.
pervasive computing: A computing environment where information and communication
technology are everywhere, for everyone, at all times. See also ambient intelligence.
PETs: Privacy-Enhancing Technologies are tools that both protect a user’s personal
identity while the user interacts with the Web and protect the privacy of communications
(such as e-mail) sent over the Internet.
phishing: A fraudulent use of e-mail to acquire a user’s password, social security number,
etc., to gain unauthorized access to information about the victim; often, the e-mail looks
as if it was sent by an official site such as eBay or PayPal.
prima facie duty: A type of moral duty that one has, all things being equal (such as
honesty, benevolence, justice, and so forth). Prima facie duties, which can be overridden
by circumstances, are contrasted with absolute duties.
RFID: Radio Frequency Identification is a technology that consists of a tag (microchip)
containing an electronic circuit, which stores data, and an antenna that broadcasts data by
radio waves in response to a signal from a reader.
risk analysis: A methodology used to make an informed decision about a product based
on considerations such as cost. A costs-benefits model of risk assessment for software
can include criteria such as safety, reliability, schedule, budget, consumer demand, and
so forth.
Glossary b 415
BGLOSS3GXML 10/20/2012 0:19:8 Page 416
robo-ethics: A field that examines the ways that humans design, use, and treat robots and
related AI entities. See also machine ethics.
robotics: The field of research and development in robots and robotic parts/limbs. See
also expert systems.
sexting: The use of cell phones (or similar handheld electronic devices) to send nude
or seminude photos of oneself to others; in some cases, these photos become widely
distributed and can eventually end up on the Internet.
Social Networking Service (SNS): A Web-based service, such as Facebook, Twitter,
Linked-In, and so forth, which enables users to construct a profile and share information
with other members (or “friends”) on the online forum.
spam: E-mail that is generally considered to be unsolicited, promotional, and sent in
bulk to multiple users.
Turing test: a scenario in which a person engaged in a conversation on a computer screen
with some “entity” (located in a room that is not visible to the person) is asked to
determine whether he or she is conversing with another human or with a computer.
utilitarianism: A consequentialist ethical theory based on the principle that an act or
policy is morally permissible if it results in the greatest good (usually measured in
terms of happiness) for the greatest number of people affected by it. See also
consequentialism.
valid argument: An argument form in which the premises, if assumed true, are sufficient
to guarantee the truth of the conclusion.
virtual environment: An online (or computer-generated) environment, which is contrasted
with an environment in physical space. Virtual environments, as opposed to
virtual reality (VR) environments and applications, can be either two dimensional
(e.g., text-only) or three dimensional. See also virtual reality.
virtual reality: A three-dimensional, interactive computer-generated environment, as
contrasted with physical reality. See also virtual environment.
virtue ethics: A theory that stresses character development and the acquisition of
“correct” moral habits as opposed to mere conformance with certain rules for action,
which are typically associated with duty-based (deontological) and consequence-based
(utilitarian) ethical theories.
virus: A program that can insert executable copies of itself into other programs; also
generically referred to as a malicious program. See also worm.
worm: A program or program segment that searches computer systems for idle resources
and then disables them by erasing various locations in memory; also generically referred
to as a malicious program. See also virus.
